#+TITLE: Handing Conflicting Edits - a proposal

RFC022 included a request to improve the design of how concurrent
edits are managed in Publish My Data.

The statement was:

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
Two different draftsets can include modifications to the same
graph. Currently, if both draftsets are published, a ‘last save wins’
strategy is used.  While offering flexibility, this approach includes
the risk that one user can accidentally overwrite or undo the edits of
another.  The workflow should be reviewed to reduce this risk.  The
design phase of the project will include analysis and presentation of
the options and a recommendation for an updated approach.
#+END_QUOTE

This document outlines a proposed strategy for handling this, with a
particular focus on reducing the risk of concurrent edits and merges
resulting in unexpected errors.

The proposal outlined in this document has been carefully designed to
be compatible with the API work [[http://api.grafter.org/scratch/swagger/][specified]] for delivery towards the end
of Q1 2016, and it builds upon concepts described in that work.  No
delivery dates are yet associated with this proposal.

We propose two new mechanisms to resolve these issues.  The first is
concerned with conflict detection when merging a draftset with the
live site, whilst the second provides users greater visibility about
when other draftsets contain changes to graphs they have amendments on.

Both of these mechanisms build on the PMD Draftset concept.

* What are Draftsets?

Draftsets are essentially, private working copies, or branches of
work, that contain changes to RDF data.  When a user creates a
draftset they effectively create a 'virtual copy' of the site's
data in which they can safely make, review and query changes
before publishing them to the live site.

* Proposal: Merging with Live

We propose an extension to Publish My Data's [[http://api.grafter.org/scratch/swagger/][Drafter API]] that supports
an optimistic locking strategy for publishing changes to RDF graphs by
comparing graph revisions.

** Merging Example

The diagram below describes the evolution of a single graph of data,
being edited by two users, via two Draftsets =A= and =B=.

First we see how a user starts making changes (in blue) to the graph
in their =Draftset B=.  To do this a clone of the graph is made in
their Draftset, which they apply their changes to.

They then publish these changes to the live site for all to see.
However, just before they publish, another user starts editing the
same graph in a new =Draftset A=.  When this user tries to publish the
graph, Drafter prevents the publication; because it detects a prior
change to the graph that needs resolved.

[[file:Draftsets-1.png][file:./Draftsets-1.png]]

There are effectively three options available to the user, they can
choose one of the two sets of changes in their entirity, electing to
lose one set of edits, or they can attempt to merge both sets of
changes at publish those.

It's worth noting that changes are tracked and managed on a per graph
basis, so it's common for merge scenarios to involve multiple graphs,
as shown in the following diagram.

Here we see how =Draft A= contains edits to only one graph, whilst
=Draft B= contains edits to both of the graphs.

[[file:Draftsets-2.png][file:./Draftsets-2.png]]

** Implementation

Firstly we propose to extend Draftset metadata to include a
=forked-from= revision-identifier that represents the version of the
live graph the graph in the draftset was branched from.

This data is stored in a Graph object under the draftset's =data=
property, e.g.

#+BEGIN_SRC json
{
    "id": "de305d54-75b4-431b-adb2-eb6b9e546014",
    "data": {
        "http://opendatacommunities.org/graph/homelessness/households-accommodated/temporary-housing-types": {
            "forked-from": "ff6410cf1eadd4c41a7a5d29a35b4cd413e33212"
        }
    },
    "display-name": "New Temporary Housing Figures",
    "description": "Quarterly updates for Q4 2015",
    "updated-at": "2016-01-04T13:35:21.000Z",
    "created-at": "2016-01-01T13:35:21.000Z",
    "current-owner": "admin@opendatacommunities.org",
    "submitted-by": "editor@opendatacommunities.org"
}
#+END_SRC

When graphs are published on the live site =revision-identifiers= are
stored with the live-graph's metadata.  These identifiers have a number
of potential uses, the primary reason being change detection.  With
=revision-identifiers= changes to live graphs between publications can
be detected by comparing at publication time the draft graph's
=forked-from= =revision-identifer= with the =revision-identifier= of
the live graph.  If the identifiers differ then a publication to the
live graph has occurred, and there is a risk that publishing the graph
might lose changes.  In this situation the Drafter service will
prevent the application from making the change and will return an
appropriate error, alerting the user to handle the potential conflict.

Conflicts can then be handled by users and applications, on a graph by
graph basis.  Broadly speaking users have the following options:

1) Overwrite the changes in live with the graph from their draftset.
2) Discard the graphs that they have changed in their draftset.
3) Merge the live graph into their draftset to combine both sets of
   changes and further refine them

Various additional API routes may need to be added to implement these
different merge strategies.

After the user has decided how to resolve the potential conflict they
can then safely resubmit their draftset for publication, with the
=revision-identifiers= from the current live graphs (to allow for the
chance that other changes have sneaked in whilst they were revising),
or alternatively with a special flag to force their changes over live.

We hope to explore ways to implement this strategy using standard HTTP
headers; in particular through the use of HTTP Etags and conditional
requests as defined in [[https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc7232][RFC 7232]], or via the 409 (Conflict) status
code ([[https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc7231#section-6.5.8][RFC 7231]]).

We believe that this model will also support future extensions to
provide much more fine-grained merging and conflict resolution.

** Revision Identifiers

Revision identifiers are used to represent the state of a graph at a
particular point in time.  Rather than comparing the changes
themselves =revision-identifiers= can be used as an efficient way to
compare draft graphs and their corresponding live graphs for potential
conflicts.

UUIDs will likely be used instead of content based hashes in the first
instance, due to the complexities associated with efficiently
generating content hashes of RDF triple-sets.

We hope to persue methods of efficiently computing content hashes for
triple-sets, that will lead to a reduced number of false positive
conflict errors.

* Proposal: Conflict notifications

As Drafter tracks the state of all Draftsets in the system it knows
when several draftsets contain changes to the same live graph.

This proposal describes how this information can be exposed as JSON
objects on the Drafter API on routes such as =GET /draftsets=.

This information /may/ then be used by PMD to provide users with
information about potential future conflicts, for example if two users
have made changes to the same graph PMD /may/ display a warning such
as "Dale also has made changes to this graph in Draftset <ID>".

3rd party applications may then make calls to this API to know when
multiple draft changes have occurred in parallel draftsets, and handle
this accordingly.  For example it would be possible for a client to
fail fast if a resource it wants to modify has changes in another
draftset.

We propose that this information is represented under a
=changed-in-draftsets= key in the Draftset object.   This is shown
below in the response to a call to =GET /draftsets=:

#+BEGIN_SRC json
[
{
    "id": "de305d54-75b4-431b-adb2-eb6b9e546014",
    "data": {
        "http://opendatacommunities.org/graph/homelessness/households-accommodated/temporary-housing-types": {
            "forked-from": "3a5ac9a7-004f-4ad4-b5af-773ae98e92b8",
            "changed-in-draftsets": [
                {
                    "id": "bd6069c8-3da6-421b-845e-5ee289aba788",
                    "current-owner": "dale@opendatacommunities.org"
                }
            ]
        }
    },
    "display-name": "New Temporary Housing Figures",
    "description": "Quarterly updates for Q4 2015",
    "updated-at": "2016-01-04T13:35:21.000Z",
    "created-at": "2016-01-01T13:35:21.000Z",
    "current-owner": "paul@opendatacommunities.org"
},
{
    "id": "bd6069c8-3da6-421b-845e-5ee289aba788",
    "data": {
        "http://opendatacommunities.org/graph/homelessness/households-accommodated/temporary-housing-types": {
            "forked-from": "3a5ac9a7-004f-4ad4-b5af-773ae98e92b8",
            "changed-in-draftsets": [
                {
                    "id": "de305d54-75b4-431b-adb2-eb6b9e546014",
                    "current-owner": "paul@opendatacommunities.org"
                }
            ]
        }
    },
    "display-name": "Experimental changes",
    "description": "Experimental changes please ignore",
    "updated-at": "2016-03-01T11:32:21.000Z",
    "created-at": "2016-01-02T11:31:21.000Z",
    "current-owner": "dale@opendatacommunities.org"
}
]
#+END_SRC

Here we see there are two draftsets open in the system, both
containing changes to a single graph, =temporary-housing-types= both
of which were =forked-from= the same initial state represented by
revision =3a5ac9a7-004f-4ad4-b5af-773ae98e92b8=.

This information shows that these users may create conflicts and
consequently may need to coordinate changes; though the user comments
on =bd6069c8-3da6-421b-845e-5ee289aba788= might imply to a user that
those changes are experimental and are not intended to ever be merged
into live.

In a similar vein, if changes to the live graph have occured since the
draft snapshot was taken, drafter could provide a boolean property
(=has-unmerged-changes=) to indicate explicitly that the live graph
has changed, e.g.

#+BEGIN_SRC json
{
    "id": "de305d54-75b4-431b-adb2-eb6b9e546014",
    "data": {
        "http://opendatacommunities.org/graph/homelessness/households-accommodated/temporary-housing-types": {
            "has-unmerged-changes": true,
            "forked-from": "3a5ac9a7-004f-4ad4-b5af-773ae98e92b8",
            "changed-in-draftsets": [
                {
                    "id": "bd6069c8-3da6-421b-845e-5ee289aba788",
                    "current-owner": "dale@opendatacommunities.org"
                }
            ]
        }
    },
    "display-name": "New Temporary Housing Figures",
    "description": "Quarterly updates for Q4 2015",
    "updated-at": "2016-01-04T13:35:21.000Z",
    "created-at": "2016-01-01T13:35:21.000Z",
    "current-owner": "paul@opendatacommunities.org"
}
#+END_SRC
